FreeSASA
=======

C-library for calculating Solvent Accessible Surface Areas.

License: GPLv3 (see file COPYING). Copyright: Simon Mitternacht 2013-2015.

The library includes the algorithms by Lee & Richards and Shrake &
Rupley. Verification has been done by comparing the results of the two
calculations and by visual inspection of the surfaces found by them
(and comparing with analytic results in the two-atom case). For high
resolution versions of the algorithms, the calculations give identical
results.

The OONS atom-classification and radii are used by default ([Ooi et al.
PNAS 1987, 84: 3086](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC304812/)). 
Users can also provide their own atomic radii; example config-files for 
NACCESS 
([Hubbard & Thornton 1993](http://www.bioinf.manchester.ac.uk/naccess/)) 
and OONS are available in the directory `share`. 

The library is still a work in progress, but, the calculations have been 
verified to give correct results for a large number of proteins. Therefore, 
the commandline tool can be considered reliable and stable. Planned changes 
mainly include refining the API, adding more options to the commandline
tool and expanding the Python bindings.

Compiling and installing
------------------------

Can be compiled and installed using the following

    ./configure
    make && make install

The program freesasa provides a command-line interface, the command
`freesasa -h` gives an overview of options. If downloaded from the git
repository the configure-script needs to be set up first using
`autoreconf -i`. Users who don't have access to autotools can download
a tarball that includes the autogenerated scripts from
http://mittinatten.github.io/freesasa/.

Profiling has shown that configuring with 

    ./configure CFLAGS='-ffast-math -funroll-loops -O3' 

increases the speed of the Shrake & Rupley algorithm significantly (10
% or so), as compared to the standard "-O2". There seems to be no
measurable effect on Lee & Richards.

Four customization options are available for the configure script

* `--enable-check` enables unit-testing using the Check framework
* `--enable-gcov` adds compiler flags for measuring coverage of tests using gcov
* `--enable-doxygen` activates building of Doxygen documentation
* `--enable-latex` activates building of LaTeX documentation

Documentation
-------------

A regular build generates a manual (in 
[doc/manual.pdf](http://mittinatten.github.io/freesasa/manual.pdf)) with 
examples and explanation of how to use the commandline tool and the API, 
and a
[full reference manual](http://mittinatten.github.io/freesasa/doxygen/)
can be built using Doxygen (if available). Both are also available from 
the GitHub-pages at http://mittinatten.github.io/freesasa/. 

After building the package, calling

    freesasa -h
    
explains how the commandline tool can be used.

Compatibility
-------------

Has been tested successfully with several versions of GNU C Compiler
and Clang/LLVM. Building the library only requires standard C and GNU
libraries.  Developers who want to do testing need to install the
Check unit testing framework.  Building the full reference manual
requires Doxygen (version > 1.8.8), and the 'regular' manual, LaTeX.

